config terminals
>SWT(config)#interface range g1/0 - 10
>SWT(config-if-range)#switchport mode access
>SWT(config-if-range)#switchport access vlan 10
>% Access VLAN does not exist. creating vlan 10


>Chanching vlan names
>SWT(config)#vlan 10
>SWT(config-vlan)#name Engineering
>WT(config-vlan)#vlan 20
>WT(config-vlan)#name HR

#QUIZ
- What is a LAN? *LAN is a group of devices (PC, Servers, Routers, Switches, etc. in a single location or offices) is asingle broadcast domain*
- A Broadcast domains *Is the group  of devices which will reveive a broadcast frame (destination MAC FFFF.FFFF.FFFF) sent by any one of the members*
- *VLAN are configure on switches on a * per-interface *  bases *
- *VLAN are *logically separate end hosts at Layer 2.*
- *Switches do not forward traffic directly between hosts in different VLANs*
-  *An access port is a switchport which belongs a single VLAN, and usally connects to end hosts like PSs*
-   *Truck is switchport which carry multiple VLAN *
- What is a  VLAN
	- *It is essentially a way to a logically split up a layer 2 broadcast domain to make multiple seperate broadcast domains *
- What is the purpose of VLANs
	- *The two big reasons are network performance and Security *
	- *VLANs helps to reduce unnecesary broadcast traffic, which helps prevent network congestion *
- How to configure VLANs on Cisco switches
- How many broadcast domains are shown in this network diagram?
- What happens if you try to assign a switch interface to a VLAN that does not exist?
	- It will create the VLAN
- If PC3 sends a broadcast message, how many devices will receive it? in a grouped vlans?
- You created VLANS's 10,20, 30 on a Cisco switch. How many VLAN's will be displayed in the output of the *show vlan brief*  commands?
#Part2 
- What is truck port?
	- Trunk port can curry multiple vlan port in a single interface
- What is the purpose of trunk ports?
- 802.1Q Encapsuation?
	- it to identify which vlan bellong to traffic in a trunk port
- How to configure trunk ports?
- 'Router on a stick' (ROAS)?


- Inter vland connection is performed in router 
- Trunk ports  = 'tagged' ports
- Access ports = 'untagged' ports

There are two main trunking protocols:
- ISL(Inter-Switch Link) (it is old not use any more)
- IEEE 802.1Q   dot1q 

 
#Trunking 
SW1(config)#interface g0/0
SW1(config-if)#switchport mode trunk
Command rejected: An interface
SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk encapsulation ?
dot1q --
isl --
negotiate
SW1(config-if)#switchport mode trunk encapsulation dot1q
SW1(config-if)#switchport mode trunk

SW1#show interface trunk
.... Informatio

SW1(config)#interface g0/0
SW1(config-if)#switchport  trunk allowed vlan ?
  -WORD VLAN IDs of the allowed VLANs when this port is in trunking mode
	-add    add VLANs to current list
	-all       all VLANs
	-except all VLANs except the following
	-none   no VLANs 
	-remove remove VLANs from the current list    

#examples
SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk allowed  vlan 10, 20    #itshowsonlyallowedvlans

SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk allowed vlan add 20    #it_adds_vlan_20_on_the_list

SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk allowed vlan remove 20  #it_removes_from_the_list

SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk allowed vlan all          #all_vlan_are_allowed_trunk_now

SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk allowed vlan except 1-5, 10    #it_allows_all_vlans_excpt_those_mention

SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk allowed vlan none          #no_vlan_allowed_truck


*For security purposes, it is best to change the native VLAN to an unset VLAN. 
(Network security will be explained more in-depth later in the course)
**Make sure the native VLAN matches on between switches** *

**command to change native vlan is**
SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk native vlan 1001

SW1#show vlan breaf
*The **show vlan brief** command shows the access ports assigned to each VLAN,
NOT the trunk ports that allow each VLAN
INSTEAD USE **show interfaces trunk** comman to confirm trunk ports*

#Example_truck_port

SW1(config)#interface g0/0
SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk encapsulation dot1q
SW1(config-if)#switchport mode trunk 
SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk allowed vlan 10, 30
SW1(config-if)#switchport trunk native vlan 1001
SW1(config-if)#do show interfaces trunk













[[1.0 Switches]]